
WHAT IS THIS?
This mod applies the principles of ecology and complex systems to create a functional, self sustaining, adaptive ecosystem out of self replicating blocks.

It simulates the behaviour of a real ecosystem.

These particular blocks are set to create a forest system, complete with trees, herbivores, predators, and soil formation.

These three blocks are the minimum to create an ecosystem 

	- Tree Bot: grows trees in the presence of light
	- Herbivore Bot: eats photosynthetic bots
	- Decomposer Bot: eats dead matter

Additional bots add to the system's abilities.	
	- Detritivore Bot: eats decomposers
	- Apex Predator Bot: eats herbivores and detritivores
	- Pioneer Bot: a fast growing ground plant. (used as either an alternative or a compliment to the tree).

Note - while this so far seems to create realistic ecosystems, it creates a system so complicated that what it will end up becoming in long term is any one's guess!


HOW TO USE:

Spawner:
This is off by default. To turn it on open the init.lua file and unblock the line for dofile spawner.

The spawner can be used to spawn bots on grass in new maps. However this doesn't ensure all bot types will get established. Animals need a food supply, so may they starve before the plants grow.

Either way getting a new forest going benefits from some help.


Grow your own forest:

1. Start by placing plenty of photosynthetic and pioneer bots around. Then place more. And more. No... I meant more than that. More!
2. Let them grow. Forests take a long time to get established. Hit leaves to make them fall and encourage soil formation and new growth. Destruction breeds creation, so go wild.
3. Introduce herbivores. Note - all animals must be placed beside a food source or they die.
4. Once you're getting lots of dead matter introduce decomposers.
5. When the herbivores and decomposers have reached a good number you can introduce their predators, the detritivores and the apex predator.
6. Leave it be, or become a part of the forest. You will act as another component of the system: an omnivorous super-predator and ecosystem engineer - just like you are in reality.

Note - things can take a while to get established, be patient. It is growing. Slowly.


HOW THIS WORKS:
See the pdf "The Theory Behind Ecobots"



CAUTIONS:
Like real living organisms an established ecobot forest is difficult to eliminate. If you don't want one, don't plant one.

The forest tends to slowly spread into new areas. Like real living things it will eventually get everywhere.

The ecobots can cause some damage to structures. They will also bury things in vegetation and soil. Therefore if you don't want your buildings to go the way of lost Mayan temples swallowed by the jungle, then you'll have to do pruning, or make some kind of barrier.



KEY PARAMETERS

Settings are included for:
-pioneer plant growth rates
-tree growth rates for each of it's for growth types

You may wish to raise growth rates early on to get the forest established, then lower them later to reduce the need to clear overgrowth from swamping buildings.

Change other parameters at your own risk.

This is a finely balanced system. Changing paramaters can have unpredictable effects. This is what I think each of the controlling parameters are doing.


These control growth (most important parameters of all):
- Population radius: how large of an area around each bot is considered part of it's population

- Population limit: how many bots are allowed in one population area.

- Dispersal radius: how far away new bots can be spawned from their parent.


For a dispersal radius of 1, Population limit = ((Radius x 3 ) -1) is static. It cannot escape the population limit by spreading. Some configurations do spread further than others, but I don't think infinite growth is possible at 3r - 1. Either way it lucks out eventually chooses a bad shape and stops growing.

Larger a radius should give bigger structures, but use only for trees. Animals seem to fare poorly with a large radius. I suspect this is because it controls density, animals seems to need to live at a smaller scale than the trees they feed on.

The dispersal radius for plants is always small so they form limited structures and avoid runaway exponential growth. Animals can be larger so they can spread to isolated pockets of vegetation. Their populations are limited by food supply and feedback loops to keep exponential growth in check.

These control balance between species and how quickly the forest changes:
-interval: how quick it grows
-chance: how likely it is to grow

chances and intervals should be set relatively long and low or it chews up too much computing power. The differences between bot types is currently tuned by ear.


Tree growth form:
This controls tree shape. They have four ways of spreading:
	-Up (forms a trunk)
	-Branching (requires wood to attach to, and extends a wood branch)
	- Leafy (requires "leaves" to attach to and air under extends an unstable canopy. These are important for forest growth as they create litter fall/dispersal of plants). 
	- ground (needs dirt with grass underneath, extends along the ground.)
Boosting one growth form tends to supress the others. Currently tuned by ear.






